journalists and independent
investigators have been locked out of
the Gaza Strip Palestinians there are up
against an internet and electricity
blackout making online access and news
on the ground very difficult to come by
social platforms have become a refuge
for those able to get online to find and
share information however in the last
two weeks we've also seen a wave of
disinformation hate speech as well as
Shadow Banning and content takedowns by
social media companies all of which are
disproportionately affecting
Palestinians helping us to make sense of
what's Happening online is marwa fataa
she's with the digital Rights group
access now marwa thank you for speaking
with us today happy to be here let's
start with the total Siege the Israelis
have imposed on Gaza you've monitored
you've documented how information
blackouts are used in a time of War how
concerning is what we're seeing in Gaza
right now uh Palestinians in Gaza are
under a Complete Siege and there is of
course a near complete information
Blackout um during Israel's uh
bombardment campaign of the Gaza Strip
um two of the three main
telecommunications lines or companies in
the Gaza Strip have been bombarded um
people are relying currently on only one
line of communications with internet and
Telecommunications disruptions um and
that means that people in Gaza are not
able to access information not able to
check on their loved ones they're not
able to seek life-saving information and
they're cut off from the world um they
have fewer and fewer opportunities to
share and tell their stories and to
document human rights abuses and and war
crimes internet shutdowns provide a
convenient cover for perpetrators of
atrocities of Human Rights abuses uh to
commit those in in the dark uh to cover
the trails of their crimes uh and to um
impede or hinder any future possibility
of accountability and and Justice in the
first half of this program We examined
some of the genocidal rhetoric that's
been coming from Israeli officials and
other Israeli figures how much of that
language are you seeing being mirrored
online the Cs for violence the
unverified claims there is a barage of
um hate speech incitement to violence
content that is uh de humanizing of
Palestinians islamophobic content um
anti-semitic content and that is all
circulating unfortunately uh with little
moderation uh from social media
companies there are of course many
utterances from Israeli officials on
social media um that shows their clear
intent on committing genocide including
for instance most recently uh by prime
minister Netanyahu on formerly known as
Twitter that this fight and this war is
a war between children of lightness and
Children Of Darkness between humanity
and the law of uh of of jungle and it
raises a question about to what extent
social media companies are complicit in
entertaining and housing and amplifying
uh these genocidal um rhetorics that are
clearly in violation of international
humanitarian law and international law
in General on that Point since hamas's
attack on October 7th we've seen the
Israeli government flood social media
with ads with graphic and provocative
imagery what are you seeing there on
that side of things and how willingly
have these online platforms played host
to Israeli government messaging since
hamas's attack on on Israel on October
7th um the Israeli government has
launched a social media campaign I would
say an aggressive social media campaign
to um shape the narrative and the
conversation online um we've seen for
example the Israeli Ministry of Foreign
Affairs had run up to 86 ads on YouTube
uh some of which shows indeed graphic
content um equating Hamas to Isis and
also showing the the impact of of the
attacks and it's clear that you know
paid targeted
advertisement uh has become a weapon of
War governments that have the resources
and the capacity to produce uh such
material can use these Platforms in
order to spread War propaganda and in
this context to justify the collective
punishment of Palestinians and um war
crimes and War you know crimes against
humanity that we see unfolding before
before our eyes Palestinians are also
saying that social media companies have
been taking down their content
threatening to close their accounts some
say they're being shadowbanned outright
tell us what examples you're seeing and
are these acts of censorship on these
various platforms affecting voices on
both sides we've seen users accounts
being shut down including very notable
users and journalists whose voices are
very important there's also been
arbitary decisions uh made and when when
it comes to removing content one major
concern that is repeatedly being
reported is the so-called Shadow Banning
and whereas companies don't really use
that term um I've witnessed it myself uh
and I've seen many users reporting it
that you know their their content is
being uh demoted uh down ranked the
engagement with this content is is
significantly reduced in comparison to
other content not related to Palestine
unfortunately we thought that in 2021
we've settled matters as in it was clear
um that this systematic and
discriminatory approach to moderating
Palestinian content has been exposed um
there's no way for platforms to G gasl
light users or Civil Society
organizations that this is uh just the
result of a technical glitch which
surprisingly we don't see in other
crisis like when Russia invaded uh
Ukraine we have seen actually
proactive uh statements from different
companies uh uh stating their unwavering
commitment to upholding ukrainians right
to freedom of expression such commitment
to human rights have not been extended
to Pal iians despite of what companies
claim the users's experience and the
reality of what we've uh documenting uh
States otherwise marwa fataa of access
now thank you for speaking with us today
here at the listening post thank
you